this is democracy now democracynow.org
the quarantine report I'm Amy Goodman
the death rate from the corona virus
pandemic continues to accelerate with
worldwide confirmed deaths topping
145,000 in the United States deaths
surged to another record high Thursday
nearly doubling to surpass the previous
record set just a day before at four
thousand 591 US residents died over a
single 24-hour period well today we
continue my conversation with Noam
Chomsky the world renowned political
dissident linguist and author of more
than a hundred books
he's a laureate professor in the
Department of linguistics at the
University of Arizona Tucson and
professor emeritus at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology where he taught
for more than half a century professor
Chomsky joined us last week from his
home in Tucson Arizona where he is
sheltering in place with his wife ilaria
we spoke just after President Donald
Trump foreshadowed hey this week's
announcement that he would cut off US
support for the World Health
Organization this is Trump addressing
reporters last week time to freeze
funding to the WHL during a pandemic
investigated we're going to look at it
can you talk about what he's threatening
to do right now first they reject the
w-h-o tests that would have been
critical and now saying they're gonna
defund the World Health Organization
well this is typical behavior of
autocrats and dictators when you make
colossal errors which are killing
thousands of people find somebody else
to blame and in the United States it's
unfortunately the case for well over a
century century and a half that is
always easy to blame the yellow barrel
the yellow they're coming after us we've
seen this all through my life in fact
way before so blame the World Health
Organization blame China claimed that
the World Health Organization is has
insidious relations with China as
brightly working for them and that sells
to a population that's been deeply
indoctrinated for a long time way back
to the Chinese Exclusion Act in the 19th
century to say yeah those yellow
barbarians are coming over to destroy us
that's almost instinctive and the and
it's backed up by the echo chamber so
you know save rush limbaugh science is
one of the four corners of deceit along
with media
academia got one of the others but
they're the four corners of the seat
they live on deceit you keep driving
that into people's heads
they say Washington we believe anything
now why should we believe the news it's
just fake news now they were all trying
to destroy our Savior our president the
greatest president ever it's old enough
to remember as a child that listening to
Hitler's speeches over the radio Norberg
rallies they couldn't understand the
words but the tone and the reaction of
the crowd the adoring crowd was very
clear the very frightening
we know what it led to it's hard to it
comes to mind at once when you listen to
Trump's ravings in the crowd I don't
suggest that he's anything like Hitler
Hitler had an ideology horrible ideology
not only massacring all the Jews 30-30
man Slavs the Roma conquering much of
the world but also an internal ideology
the state under the control of the Nazi
Party should control every aspect of
life should even control the business
community that's not the world we're in
in fact it's almost the opposite
business control controlling the
government and as far as Trump is
concerned the only detectable ideology
is pure narcissism me that's the
ideology as long as I am smart enough to
keep serving the real masters pour money
into the pockets is very wealthy in the
corporate sector and they'll let you get
away with your antics it's pretty
striking to see what happened that the
Davos conference this January that's the
meeting of the people who are called the
Masters of the Universe CEOs the major
corporations you know big media stars
and so on now they get together in Davos
once a year congratulate each other and
wonderful they are put on a hose of
dedicated humanists couldn't do you know
just totally devoted to the welfare of
the people of the world you're safe
leaving your fate in our hands because
we're such good guys Trump came along
and gave the keynote address they don't
like throw his vulgarity is incompatible
with the image that they're trying to
project of cultivated humanism but they
wildly applauded him lustily thought of
every word because they know
that he does recognize which pockets you
have to fill with dollars and how to do
it and as long as he does that as long
as he serves his major constituency
they'll let him get away with the antics
in fact like it because he mobilizes a
crowd that'll back policies like his
legislative achievements main one is a
tax cam that pours money into the hands
of the corporate coffers and arms
everyone else the deregulation is great
for business they love it they can
destroy the environment and harm people
as much as they want very harmful to the
population that you cut back on
pollution constraints auto emission of
emission regulations what happens people
die of collusion the mercury poisoning
the waters are poisoned in the world it
goes is facing disaster you're
accelerating the disaster as I said even
in the February 10th budget while
cutting back on protection against
diseases in the midst of a raging
pandemic increases funding for fossil
fuel production which is gonna destroy
us all of course a lot more money for
the medigun and for his famous wool
that's the world we're living in here
not everywhere as I said the Asian
countries have been acting sensibly New
Zealand actually seems have killed it
all so Taiwan's doing very well in
Europe Germany as may be the lowest
death rate in the world Norway as well
there are ways to react and there are
ways to try to destroy everything that
what President Trump is leading with the
support of the Murdoch echo chamber Fox
News and others
and amazingly this conjuring act is
working so with one and you raise your
hand to heaven I'm the chosen one I'm
your Savior I'm gonna rebuild America to
make it great again for you because I'm
the I'm the servant of the loyal servant
of the working class and so on
meanwhile with the other hand you're
stabbing them all in the back to carry
this off is a act of political genius
you have to recognize that serious
talent is involved with her intuitive or
conscious planet it's devastating we've
seen it before we see it now and
dictators of the water Kratts sociopaths
you happen to get into leadership
positions and it's now happening in the
moat and the richest most important
country in world history so you have
this situation in the United States
where the economy has been brought to a
standstill because of the absolute
catastrophe of this pandemic that people
have to isolate although isolation is a
luxury for so many essential workers
they have to come out into this pandemic
and face enormous threat to their own
lives if you can talk about whether you
see this pandemic perhaps threatening
global capitalism overall or shoring it
up and how the trillions of dollars that
are being put into these stimulus
packages are going to simply intensify
inequality are actually going to help
people at the bottom that's a choice not
an inevitability I mean the the
corporate sector is working hard to plan
for a future of the kind that you're
described
the question is whether other
organizations will be able to impose
enough pressure to make sure that this
doesn't happen and there are ways and
take the corporate which you just
described
corporations right now are hiding their
copies of Ayn Rand and rushing to the
nanny state and asking for to be for
benefits from the public to overcome of
the results of their criminal behavior
but what have they been doing for the
last year's profits have been going
sky-high
they've been indulging in a orgy of
stock buybacks which are devices to
increase the the wealth for the rich
shareholders and for management while
undermining the productive capacity of
the enterprise at a huge scale not
sending the setting there are offices
somewhere in a little room in Ireland so
they don't pay taxes using tax havens
this is not small change this is tens of
trillions of dollars robbing the
taxpayer does that have to be the case
take the current giveaway to
corporations it should be accompanied by
conditionalities term were familiar with
from the IMF they should be required to
ensure that there will be no more use of
tax havens there will be no more stock
buybacks period if they don't do that
with a firm guarantee no money from the
public is that utopian not at all that
was the law and the law was enforced up
until Ronald Reagan
who turned on the spigot said Rob as
much as he liked with Milton Friedman
and other luminaries in the background
telling him that's Liberty Liberty means
Rob the public massively by things like
tax havens and stock buybacks so there's
nothing utopian about these conditions
says let's go back to a period of pretty
much regimented capitalism which
developed since Roosevelt was carried
through of the seventies when it began
to erode and which Reagan just ended
there should be further conditionalities
should be working people should be
placed that part of management should be
representatives of workers that
impossible what's done in other
countries Germany for example there
should be a requirement that they
guarantee a living wage not just minimum
wage a living wage that's a
conditionality can be imposed and we can
move further and recognize and notice
that all of this is pretty Trump Trump
is taking a failing the lethal system
and turning it into a monstrosity but
the roots were before him just think
back at thee to the reason why the
pandemic occurred in the first place
drug companies are following capitalist
logic they don't want to do anything the
neoliberal Hammer says the government
can't do anything the way it did in the
past you've caught in a vice then comes
along Trump that makes it in Coverley
worse but the roots of the crisis are
great Trump the same with the health
care system like we know that everyone
knows the bit should know the basic
facts it's an international scandal
not twice the costs of comparable
countries some of the worst outcomes the
costs were recently estimated by a study
in The Lancet one the world's leading
medical journals they estimated that the
cost the annual annual cost of Americans
are close to half a trillion dollars and
sixty-eight thousand lives lost it's not
so small world renowned political
dissident linguist and author Noam
Chomsky when we come back he'll discuss
conditions in Gaza during the pandemic
and the rise of authoritarianism around
the world and the progressive response
stay with us this is democracy now
democracynow.org the quarantine report
I'm Amy Goodman as we return to part two
of our conversation with Noam Chomsky
world renowned linguist political
dissident and author I asked him about
Gaza one of the most densely populated
places on earth were at least 15 cases
of 13 cases of kovin 19 have been
reported the World Health Organization
reports there are just 87 ventilators
for Gaza
two million residents nearly 300 cases
and two deaths have been confirmed in
the West Bank this is professor Chomsky
if you can talk for a moment globally
about what's happening on an issue that
you that has been close to your heart
for decades and that is the occupied
territories Gaza and the West Bank what
it means for a place like Gaza called by
the UN and people around the world a
kind of open-air prison of almost 2
million people what the pandemic could
mean there it's almost impossible to
think about Gaza is 2 million people who
were in the
living in a prison open-air prison under
constant attack Israel which is the
occupying power recognized by everyone
in the world except Israel Israel is
imposing it has been imposing very harsh
sanctions ever since the Palestinians
made the mistake of carrying out the
first free election in the Arab world
and electing the wrong people the United
States and Israel came down on them like
a ton of bricks Israel's policy as was
explained by the vice gloss the person
in charge of the withdrawal of Israeli
troops withdrawal the settlers and
imposition of the new regime explained
frankly we are putting the people of
Gaza on a diet just enough to keep them
alive
meaning wouldn't look good if they all
died but not anything more than that so
not a piece of chocolate or a toy for a
child that's out just enough to stay
alive I don't know if you know if you're
have a serious health problem and maybe
you can apply to go to the hospital in
East Jerusalem maybe after a couple of
weeks who be allowed to go and maybe a
child is allowed to go but his mother's
not allowed to come if the pen went that
there are now a couple of cases in Gaza
if that extends it's a total disaster
the international institutions have
pointed out that by 2020 that's now Gaza
will probably become barely livable
about 95 percent of the waters totally
polluted places and disaster that's and
Trump has made sure that it'll get worse
he withdrew fun
from the support systems for
Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank
Lanois killed the funding that
Palestinian hospitals killed the funding
and he had a reason they weren't
praising him enough they weren't
respectful of the God
so therefore will strangle them even
when they're barely surviving under a
harsh and brutal regime incidentally
this extends to the Palestinians in
Israel as well human rights activists in
Israel pointed out recently this
articles about it in our it's that
Israel finally began to set up a few
drive by the contesting areas only in
Jewish areas not in the areas of with
Palestinian population not to make sure
that that the intended results would
follow
now they announced it only in Hebrew not
in Arabic so Palestinians wouldn't even
know
well that's within Israel and the
occupied territories far worse than the
Trump hammer came in saying we're not
even gonna give you penny because you're
not respectful enough with me I don't
know how to describe this kind of thing
I can't find words were known trance key
what do you think is required and an
international response to stop the rise
of authoritarianism in response to this
pandemic for example in the Philippines
where the authoritarian leader Trump
ally Duterte talks about killing people
the massive crackdown without support of
the people of India 1.3 billion people
with Narendra Modi president Trump was
in India as the pandemic was taking off
never saying a word
at packing a stadium a hundred thousand
people you have Orban Orban and hungry
who is now ruling by decree what would
what would it take to turn that around
to be a progressive response well
actually what's happening to the extent
that you can find some coherent policy
and the madness in the white house one
thing does emerge with considerable
clarity namely an effort to construct an
international of the most reactionary
states and oppressive states led by the
gangster in the white house now this is
taking shape can run through it but
since you mentioned India Modi who is a
Hindu nationalist extremist is
consistently moving to destroy Indian
secular democracy and to crush the
Muslim population was happening and
Kashmir's horrifying was bad enough
before now getting much worse same with
the Muslim population a huge population
in India the current lockdown is almost
you can almost describe it as genocide
'el the Modi gave I think a four hour
warning saying total lockdown that's
over a billion people some of them have
nowhere to go people in the informal
economy which is a huge number of people
our just chaste out go walk back to your
village which may be a thousand miles
away and die on the roadside
this is a huge catastrophe in the making
right on top of the strong efforts to
impose the you know the ultra-right
ended the doctrines that are at the core
of Modi's thinking in background but
what's happening in quite apart from
this India in fact South Asia generally
it's going to become unlivable pretty
soon if current climate policies persist
as less summer the temperature in
Rajasthan went up to 50 degrees
centigrade
you know it's Menace increasing that
hundreds of millions of people in India
that don't have access to water that's
going to get much worse could lead to a
nuclear war between the two powers that
basically rely on the same water
resources which are declining under
global warming Pakistan and India I mean
the horror story that's developing is
again indescribable you can't find words
for it and some people are cheering
about it like Donald Trump and his
friend Wilson are oh and Brazil a couple
of other sociopaths but how do you
counter a reactionary international by
developing a progressive international
now there are steps to that they don't
get much publicity but this I think it's
this coming December there will be a
formal announcement of what has been in
process for some time
Yanis varoufakis the founder leading
figure in gym 25 the progressive
movement in europe very important vara
focused and bernie sanders that came out
with the declaration calling for a
progressive international to combat and
we hope overcome the reactionary
international based in the white house
now if you look at the level of states
this looks like i've extremely unequal
competition but states are not the only
things that exist if you look at the
level of people it's not impossible it's
possible to construct a progressive
international based on people ranging
from the organized political groups that
have been proliferating that have gotten
a huge shot in the arm from the Sanders
campaign ranging from them to self help
mutual aid self help organizations that
are arising in communities all over the
world in the most impoverished areas of
Brazil for example and even this
astonishing fact that I mentioned that
the murderers crime gangs are taking
responsibility for bringing some form of
decent protection against the pandemic
and the favelas the miserable slums in
Rio all of this is happening on the
popular level if it expands and develops
if people don't just give up and despair
but work to change the world as they've
done in the past under much worse
conditions if they do that there's a
chance for a progressive international
and notice bear in mind that there are
also striking cases of internationalism
progressive internationalism at the
state level so take a look at the
european union the rich countries in
europe like germany have recently given
us a lesson in just what the union means
right germany's managing pretty well
they probably have the lowest death rate
in the world it's an organized society
right next door
northern italy is suffering miserably
its germany giving the many aid no in
fact germany even blocked the effort to
develop euro bonds general bonds in
Europe which could be used to alleviate
the suffering and the countries under
worse the worst conditions but
fortunately for Italy it can look across
the Atlantic for aid from the superpower
on the Western Hemisphere Cuba Cuba is
once again as before exhibiting
extraordinary internationalism sending
doctors to Italy Germany won't do it but
Kubica China is providing materially so
these are steps towards progressive
internationalism at the state level
world renowned political dissident
linguist and author Noam Chomsky
laureate professor in the Department of
linguistics at the University of Arizona
Tucson professor emeritus at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
where he taught for more than half a
century Noam Chomsky joined us last week
from his home in Tucson Arizona where
he's sheltering in place with his wife
Valeria
go to our website at democracynow.org
all and sick to produce a doctor's notes
stay with us